80-minute Biology discussion on "prokaryote gene regulation"
Goal for student learning:
To identify the structure and regulation mechanism of the lac operon and trp operon by using a role-play
activity.
Materials:
Lecture and discussion notes.
1. In-class quiz on previous three lectures (5 min).
2. Review and role-play set-up (20 min).
2.1 Review the structure of the lac and trp operon (7 min). Draw the structure on the board for reference and review the biological process and regulation of lac operon.
2.2 Ask the students to come to the board in pairs to complete the figure with important component molecules (5 min).

 If the students can successfully draw the pathway, ask another student to talk through the pathway again.
 If the students have difficulty drawing the pathway, the other students or the GSI could help them to figure
out the pathway.

2.3 Review the trp operon mechanism (8 min).

 Ask students to work in groups of 3-4 people each for 5 min to talk through how this operon is being regulated while referring to the structure on the board. (Instructions: discuss how the trp operon responds to
environment with/without tryptophan, what proteins are involved, and how they interact with each other).
 To debrief, ask someone to talk through the trp operon mechanism (3 min).

3. Check for Understanding: Play the "Lac Operon" role-play (45 min).
3.1 Introduce the lac operon and trp operon role-play activity and explain the process (5 min).
Assign the roles of different molecules to volunteer students who will be the "actors," while all the
other students will be the "directors" of the play.
3.2 Role-play (15 min): The "actors" play the dynamic regulation of the lac operon, and the "directors"
judge whether they play a functional lac operon or not. Change the environmental conditions, play
the responses of the lac operon again (10 min). If time permits, repeat for the trp operon. (5min)
3.3 Group Discussion (10 min): As a large group, discuss the following questions:
 What are the ways to improve the play by better representing the regulation of the pathway?
 How would one exhibit specific versus non-specific interactions?
 What other responses will be stimulated under other conditions, such as mutations?

3.4 Students discuss remaining exercise questions in small groups (15 min).