50-minute Comparative Politics Class on Modernization Theory3
Objectives for student learning:
Students will be able to …

1. Analyze and discuss practical implications for contemporary political issues in light of modernization
theory.
2. Solve game theoretic models related to modernization theory.
Materials:
 PowerPoint Slides
 Handout of images from: Kashi, E. 2008. Curse of the Black Gold: 50 Years of Oil in the Niger Delta. New
York: powerHouse Books.

Agenda:
1. Review Economic Determinants of Democracy Theories – Think-pair-share (10 minutes)
Show students PowerPoint slide of Figure 6.2 from textbook depicting "Proportion of Democracies
at Various Levels of Wealth, 1950-1990".
• Think: Ask students to write a minute-paper about what this figure illustrates about the relationship between wealth and democracy. Ask them to write out the variants of modernization
theory that explain this relationship as they recall them from the textbook.
• Pair: Have them pair with a neighbor to discuss their reflections.
• Share: Debrief with whole class by asking for 2-3 students to share some of the highlights of
their conversation.
2. Game Theoretic Model Illustration – Large group discussion (10 minutes)
Display PowerPoint slide of Figure 6.8 from text, which illustrates an extensive form game between
the state and the citizen. Solve the game together as a class. Discuss the following: Given the Nash
Equilibrium solution to this game, what can we conclude about the relationship between wealth and
democracy?
3. Case Study Discussion – Large group discussion (5 minutes)
Show PowerPoint slide of the book jacket image from the novel "Les Miserables." Ask class the following discussion questions:
4.

5.

 What did the text argue was the key difference between England and France in the 17th Century? How
does this case study relate to modernization theory?

Implications of the Theory – Small group exercises (20 minutes)

4.1. "Resource Curse" implications (15 minutes):
Put up PowerPoint slide with the following instructions:
 First, I will give you each one of four photographs with a caption (a quotation or a poem) from "Curse of
the Black Gold." I’d like you to free write about how your photograph relates to the variant of modernization theory we just discussed. (2 minutes)
 Second, join into groups with 4 people who each should have a different photo than you do. Take turns
presenting your photo to the whole group. (6 minutes)
 Finally, regroup with those who have the same photo as you. Take a few minutes to compare your ideas.
Each group will present their key points to the entire class. (7 minutes)
4.2. Foreign aid implications (5 minutes):
Discuss "What about foreign aid? According to this theory, does foreign aid to governments help or hurt
their citizens living in poverty?"

Summary activity – Think-pair (5 minutes)
Display final PowerPoint slide with the following directions:
What are the key points of this unit? Write down what you see as the three most important concepts
introduced, and in one sentence, explain why these concepts are significant.
Compare with a partner.